---
layout: post
title: "Getting to Yes (part 3 of 4)"
date: 2011-05-07 22:34
comments: true
categories: Self-Development
---

The most difficult case ever! I hope I will never be such a situation in real-life. And I wish the other team read the book (GTY) more carefully. Our team was leaders of A-Far, a very poor region suffering from a lack of infrastructure and very limited health and educational services. We had a meeting with a team of Footsteps employees on starting up and operating a school in the community of northeastern A-Far. There were a few terms that we needed to settle down. Our team’s mistake was how we prioritized the interests. We should have started with the money because in this case the money to ensure A-Far’s survival was much more important than the five conditions regarding the operation of the school. One more lesson we learnt from this exercise was that we should have listed out all five conditions right up front and went through them in order from easiest to most difficult, starting with easiest first.

In our negotiation, we struggled a little bit at the five conditions but still resolved them. I knew that some of our conditions might sound ridiculous to some people but we needed to insist on them because A-Far people must follow strictly the rules of Muslim religion and the country’s culture. In negotiation, if we understand more about the other side’s background, culture, religion and belief which are the parts that cannot be separated from the people, the requirements/conditions will make more sense to us. It is called putting ourselves in the shoes of the negotiators. Lacking of those skills, the other team thought our requirements were so strict that they kept saying out loud in our mother language that we were too arrogant, and we were too poor to ask for too much. It was very unprofessional and insulting. I myself believed that Christians would not likely say something like that. However, even if they would, we knew the right way to response. Although we were very tempted to fight back, we just allowed them to let off steam, avoided reacting to their emotional outbursts (GTY) and did our best to switch back to our discussion based on the objective criteria. Without waiting to be asked, we conveyed our interests lying behind our proposals and also inquired about their interests, so that we could work out the solutions.

Finally, we agreed on the five conditions, but here came the money issue. The other team used what Fisher and Ury (GTY) called “Dirty Tricks”. They threw personal attacks on us. Sometimes, they even reopened the issues that we thought that we had settled down. There were times when we talked about the money they should pay us they didn’t increase their numbers but even decreased it although we reduced the amount we requested. According to GTY, if the other side didn’t change their position – didn’t increase their offer or decrease their demand – then we shouldn’t change our position either. Otherwise we were just arguing with ourselves/negotiating against ourselves. In the end, we worked out another solution and they accepted. I felt that they were not completely happy with it. They just accepted it because we ran out of time. I also felt that this negotiation really made our relationship worse, inside and outside the classroom. Therefore, after that I told them that we didn’t mean to make them feel comfortable, the exercise was too hard and we didn’t have a lot of room to move, hence the inefficient negotiation.

The exercise was difficult indeed, but we learnt so much from it. My teammate told me to think positively about it: if we can handle difficult cases/hard bargainers, we would not be afraid of any other situations.
